{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf102
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;\f2\fnil\fcharset77 Monaco;
\f3\fnil\fcharset77 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11800\viewh14740\viewkind0
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 About\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f1\b0 \cf0 \
This is a binary package of wxPython for MacPython on Mac OS X 10.2 or later. The wxMac binaries will be installed as well. MacPython-OSX, however, is not included with this package, but is also required to run wxPython. Before you continue you should have already installed the MacPython-OSX framework.\
\
Please note that the Mac OS ports of wxPython as well as wxWindows (a.k.a. wxMac) are works-in-progress. Report bugs via SourceForge [1] or discuss the problem on the mailing list(s) related to your questions (see below).\
\

\fs18 [1] \cf2 http://sf.net/tracker/?atid=109863&group_id=9863
\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f0\b \cf0 What will be installed and where\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f1\b0 \cf0 \
wxMac goes into
\f2 /usr/local
\f1  and wxPython will be installed into the appropriate subfolder of the Python framework. Choose the
\f3 Show files
\f1  command from the
\f3 File
\f1  menu for a complete file listing. (The menu item becomes available as soon as the license agreement is accepted in the next step.)
\f2 \

\f1 \
\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f0\b \cf0 Getting started with wxPython
\f1\b0 \
\
You can verify that wxPython was succesfully installed by running the demo. It resides on the same disk image where you found this package.  Just double click the script named
\f2 demo.py
\f1  or drag and drop it onto the Python interpreter in your
\f2 Application
\f1  folder.\
\
The official wxPython site:\
\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f2 \cf2  http://wxPython.org\cf0 \
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f1 \cf0 \
The best way to get help with wxWindows and wxPython is to subscribe to the mail lists and post questions there.  You can see info about the mail lists, including how to subscribe, at this website:\
\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f2 \cf2  http://wxPython.org/maillist.php\
\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f1 \cf0 \
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f0\b \cf0 Disclaimer
\f1\b0 \
\
\pard\tx1440\tx2880\tx4320\tx5760\tx7200\ql\qnatural

\f2 \cf0 THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\f1 \
\
\
Robin Dunn\
\
}